..  Copyright (C)  Brad Miller, David Ranum, Jeffrey Elkner, Peter Wentworth, Allen B. Downey, Chris
    Meyers, and Dario Mitchell.  Permission is granted to copy, distribute
    and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
    License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
    Foundation; with Invariant Sections being Forward, Prefaces, and
    Contributor List, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of
    the license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation
    License".

.. qnum::
   :prefix: classes-5-
   :start: 1

Adding Other Methods to a Class
-------------------------------
          
The key advantage of using a class like ``Point`` rather than something like a simple tuple ``(7, 6)`` now becomes 
apparent.  We can add methods to the ``Point`` class that are sensible operations for points.  Had we chosen to use a 
tuple to represent the point, we would not have this capability. Creating a class like ``Point`` brings an exceptional 
amount of "organizational power" to our programs, and to our thinking. We can group together the sensible operations, and 
the kinds of data they apply to, and each instance of the class can have its own state.

A **method** behaves like a function but it is invoked on a specific instance. For example, with a list bound to variable 
L, ``L.append(7)`` calls the function append, with the list itself as the first parameter and 7 as the second parameter. 
Methods are accessed using dot notation. This is why ``L.append(7)`` has 2 parameters even though you may think it only 
has one: the list stored in the variable ``L`` is the first parameter value and 7 is the second.  

We can visualize a method (called doThing for this example) in the following way. The shapes on top will allow for two 
parameters/arguments and the shape on the bottom will allow for one return value.

.. image:: Figures/method.png
   :alt: a square with two outcroppings on the top, which represent parameters, and one outcroping on the bottom, which represents the return value.

When the method is inside the class then, we can take some of our instance variables, or even new arguments in this case, 
and do some action. Here, when doThing is called we will provide a number as an argument (as demonstrated by the blue and 
yellow piece.doThing(5) image above the factory). This means that for the blue/yellow piece, we will do something with 
the number to result in a return value. A more indepth explanation will be provided later on.

.. image:: Figures/class_with_method_example.png
   :alt: the method doThing is now in the class, and takes one of the instance variables and a new number in order to put out a return value.

Let's add two simple methods to allow a point to give us information about its state.  The ``getX`` method, when invoked, 
will return the value of the x coordinate.

The implementation of this method is straight forward since we already know how to write functions that return values. 
One thing to notice is that even though the ``getX`` method does not need any other parameter information to do its work, 
there is still one formal parameter, ``self``. As we stated earlier, all methods defined in a class that operate on 
objects of that class will have ``self`` as their first parameter. Again, this serves as a reference to the object itself 
which in turn gives access to the state data inside the object.

.. activecode:: ac19_5_1
    
    class Point:
        """ Point class for representing and manipulating x,y coordinates. """
        
        def __init__(self, initX, initY):
 
            self.x = initX
            self.y = initY

        def getX(self):
            return self.x

        def getY(self):
            return self.y

    
    p = Point(7,6)
    print(p.getX())
    print(p.getY())

Note that the ``getX`` method simply returns the value of the instance variable x from the object self. In other words, 
the implementation of the method is to go to the state of the object itself and get the value of ``x``. Likewise, the 
``getY`` method looks almost the same.

Let's add another method, ``distanceFromOrigin``, to see better how methods work. This method will again not need any 
additional information to do its work, beyond the data stored in the instance variables. It will perform a more complex 
task.

.. activecode:: ac19_5_2
    
    class Point:
        """ Point class for representing and manipulating x,y coordinates. """
        
        def __init__(self, initX, initY):
 
            self.x = initX
            self.y = initY

        def getX(self):
            return self.x

        def getY(self):
            return self.y

        def distanceFromOrigin(self):
            return ((self.x ** 2) + (self.y ** 2)) ** 0.5

    
    p = Point(7,6)
    print(p.distanceFromOrigin())

Notice that the call of ``distanceFromOrigin`` does not *explicitly* supply an argument to match the ``self`` parameter. 
This is true of all method calls. The definition will always seem to have one additional parameter as compared to the 
invocation.  
